---
id: ex04-1
layout: default
title: Exercise 4
---

<div class='admonition info'>
<div class='title'>Info</div>
<div class='content'>
<p>This is an in-class exercise. An exercise page like this one will contain a brief description but is intended to be supplemented by discussion during our meeting time. Complete the exercise to the best of your ability in the time given. Feel free to talk with other students as you work, and do not be afraid to ask questions if you get stuck. Aim to complete as much as possible during our meeting, but if you cannot complete it in class you are encouraged to work at home to complete what you did not get through in class. Once finished, submit your work to Gradescope as a single <code>zip</code> file. The workflow of submitting an exercise is similar to that of homework assignments.</p>
</div>
</div>

<div class='admonition caution'>
<div class='title'>Caution</div>
<div class='content'>
<p>If your prior programming background is not in Java or C++, this exercise may take you a little longer to complete.</p>
</div>
</div>

<div class='admonition tip'>
<div class='title'>Learning Objectives</div>
<div class='content'>
<p>This exercise will help you practice your Unix/Linux and <code>git</code> commands, the text editor <em>emacs</em> (or <em>vim</em>), and will also introduce you to the basic data types, I/O statements, and simple control structures in C.</p>
</div>
</div>

### Part 1
Log into your ugrad Linux account using Terminal/PuTTY depending on what computer you are using. Navigate (using `cd`) into the *cs220-f23-public* repo you should have cloned already (see [Exercise 3-B](ex03b.html)). Do a `git pull` command to update your copy of the repo. You should now see an *ex04* subdirectory if you do an `ls exercises` command.

Next go back to the enclosing directory (using `cd ..` command) and rename your private repository from *2023-fall-student-JHED* to *my220repo* by typing `mv 2023-fall-student-JHED my220repo`, where JHED is your own unique JHED ID. This will make it easier to navigate to your private repo directory and makes your linux commands shorter. (Note that the repo name on github will not change.)

Then, you need to copy the file *ex04/gpa_simple.c* file into your repo. You could do this a few different ways. Our suggestion is to go to your home directory first, assuming both the *cs220-f23-public* and your personal *my220repo* folders reside in your home directory. (If you made a subdirectory for this course, start there.) Try using tab completion as you type the cp command so that you do not have to type every single letter.

```bash
$ cd
$ cp cs220-f23-public/exercises/ex04/gpa_simple.c my220repo
$ cd my220repo # (copy of your personal repo created with Exercise 3-A, and then renamed)
$ ls
```

Now you should see the *gpa_simple.c* file along with whatever else is in your repo. 

So right now, *gpa_simple.c* is at the top level of your personal repo (*my220repo*).  But we would like your personal repo to have a little bit more structure, since you will be using it for all exercises and most homework this semester.  So, we suggest that you make a subfolder named *exercises*, and another one inside *exercises* named *ex04*.  We will then put *gpa_simple.c* there.  First, let us confirm that you are still at the top of your personal repo.  Do this by typing the `pwd` command and see what it reports. It should look something like this:

```bash
$ pwd
/home/YOUR_LOGIN/my220repo
```

If it does not look like that, then you will need to navigate to your *my220repo*. Now, from the top of your personal repo (i.e., inside `my220repo` folder), type:

```bash
$ mkdir exercises
$ cd exercises
$ mkdir ex04
$ cd ex04
$ mv ../../gpa_simple.c .      # (note the space then dot at the end!)
```

This last command moves *gpa_simple.c* from two levels higher up, to the current folder (the *ex04* subfolder you just created).  Now it will not clutter up the top level of your repo. 

<div class='admonition tip'>
<div class='title'>A Tip for later</div>
<div class='content'>
<p>You may wish to make a similar structure for homework assignments: a homework folder with a subfolder named <em>hw0</em>. If you have not started working on <em>hw0</em> yet, create that structure first. If you've already worked on <em>hw0</em> in the top level <em>my220repo</em> folder and used git to add and commit the files, you'll want to use <code>git mv &lt;source&gt; &lt;destination&gt;</code> to rename them, then commit and push again. Feel free to ask for help in office hours or on Piazza.</p>
</div>
</div>

Ultimately (after you create your structure for homework, specific instructions not covered here), your directory structure might look something like this:

```
/home/YOUR_LOGIN
├── /cs220-f23-public
|   └── exercises
|       ├── ex02
|       │   └── hello_world.c
|       └── ex04
|           └── gpa_simple.c
└── /my220repo
    ├── exercises
    │   ├── ex02
    │   │   └── hello_world.c
    │   └── ex04
    │       └── gpa_simple.c
    └── homework 
        └── hw0
            ├── one.c
            ├── two.c
            └── three.c
```

### Part 2
Now, back to the exercise. Remember that you need to add files you want to track in your repo. Hopefully, you are still in subdirectory *my220repo/exercises/ex04*. If not return there, then execute:

```bash
$ git pull       # (good habit every time you start to work)
$ git add gpa_simple.c
```

Now you should enter an editor (*emacs* or *vim*) to read and edit this file. It contains a problem description, sample run, and pseudocode for writing a program to compute a GPA. Your job is to write the C code for it, applying all the basic concepts we have discussed in class. You will need char, int and float data types. You will need to read some input with `scanf`, and this can be tricky, so we have a link to a hint below (or ask for help). You will also need to create output with `printf`. Lastly, you will need some selection statements and a loop.

Remember to save frequently, and also compile frequently. If you open a second shell window to log into the ugrad server, you can use one for editing, and one for compiling, rather than going in and out of the editor. Here is a reminder of our compile and execute commands:

```bash
$ gcc -std=c99 -Wall -Wextra -pedantic gpa_simple.c
$ ./a.out
```

<div class='admonition tip'>
<div class='title'>Tip</div>
<div class='content'>
<p>If you are coming from a Python background, you will be most comfortable using a while loop and if/else statements in C. However, this problem has a good set-up for a switch statement, so if you do not have time in class today, try to write the grade conversion to point values with a switch statement later for practice.</p>
</div>
</div>

This FAQ will help you figure out some of the subtleties in scanning characters in c with respect to skipping newlines: <https://faq.cprogramming.com/cgi-bin/smartfaq.cgi?answer=1352443831&id=1043284392>

<div class='admonition tip'>
<div class='title'>Hint</div>
<div class='content'>
<p>try using <code>" %c%f"</code> rather than just <code>"%c%f"</code> as your <code>scanf</code> format string (note the space)!</p>
</div>
</div>

Once you have a (partial) program that compiles and runs, you should remember to commit it to your repo to create that snapshot:

```bash
$ git status   # (good habit, see if anything important needs to be `git add`ed for tracking)
$ git add gpa_simple.c   # (you'll likely need to add this file now!)
$ git commit -m "ex04 gpa working version"
```

You can then continue to work on the program development. Before you leave your work session, remember to commit one more time, and then push to synchronize with the remote repo:

```bash
$ git commit -m "gpa done for now"
$ git push
```

<div class='admonition tip'>
<div class='title'>Reminder</div>
<div class='content'>
<p>Remember to submit to Gradescope to check your program results (see <a href="ex03a.html">Exercise 3-A</a> for submission instructions - same as homework), and use <code>exit</code> to logout from your ugrad account when finished. If you continue to work on the program after class, make sure to keep your repo updated as well!</p>
</div>
</div>
