---
id: ex12
layout: default
title: Exercise 12
---

<div class='admonition info'>
<div class='title'>Info</div>
<div class='content'>
<p>This is an in-class exercise. An exercise page like this one will
contain a brief description but is intended to be supplemented by
discussion during our meeting time. Complete the exercise to the best of
your ability in the time given. Feel free to talk with other students as
you work, and do not be afraid to ask questions if you get stuck. Aim to
complete as much as possible during our meeting, and submit on Gradescope
to check your solution. You are encouraged to work at home to complete
what you do not get through today, and ask questions on Piazza or in
office hours.</p>
</div>
</div>

<div class='admonition tip'>
<div class='title'>Learning Objectives</div>
<div class='content'>
<p>Reinforces concepts learned in today's meeting:</p>
<ul>
<li>Use pointer arithmetic to access array elements</li>
<li>Use pointer arithmetic to treat regions of a larger array as "sub-arrays"</li>
<li>Use pointer differences to compute indices of array elements based
    on their displacement from the base address</li>
<li>Use pointers to access subsets of a 2D array as 1D arrays</li>
</ul>
</div>
</div>

### Part 1
Pull the starter code for this exercise from the public repo by taking the following steps:

1.	Log into an undergraduate cluster computer. Update the course public repo with a `git pull` command.

2.	Confirm that you can access the template files for today’s exercise by typing 
	`ls exercises/ex12` -- you should see files named `bsearch.c`
	and `sudoku.c`, as well as 3 plain text input puzzle files
	`puzzle*.txt`. There should also be files `sudokuHelpers.h`,
	`sudokuHelpers.c`, and a `Makefile` for easy compilation and
	updating of the sudoku code.

3.	Navigate to your personal repo for the course and make a directory
	for today's exercise. Then copy all the files from the public class
	repository (in the `*/exercises/ex12/*` directory) and put it in your
	personal repo's directory for today's exercise.


### Part 3
Open `bsearch.c` with a text editor. To compile the code, use this command:

```bash
gcc -std=c99 -pedantic -Wall -Wextra bsearch.c -g -o bsearch   
```

or use our alias:

```bash
gccc bsearch.c -g -o bsearch
```

You will need to modify `bsearch.c` as follows.

First, add a declaration and definition for a function called `search`.
The declaration should look like this:

```c
int *search(int *start, int *end, int search_val);
```

`TODO` comments indicate where to add the declaration and definition.

This function implements a binary search to find an integer value
`search_val` in a region of a sorted array of `int` values. The `start` and
`end` parameters specify a range of elements to search, where `start`
is a pointer to the inclusive start element, and `end` is a pointer to
the *exclusive* end element.  I.e., the pointers to the elements in the range
to be searched are greater than or equal to `start`, and strictly less
than `end`.

If the search is successful, the `search` function should return a pointer
to the element where `search_val` was located.  If the search is unsuccessful,
the `search` function should return `NULL`.

Recall that you implemented binary search in [Exercise 7](ex07).
Note that in today's exercise, you are not required to implement the binary
search using recursion. Either recursion or iteration is fine. However,
keep in mind that for Ex 7 both of the range indices `low` and `high`
were *inclusive*.

Next, after you have implemented the `search` function, you should complete
the code in the `main` function.  You will see a block of code that looks
like this:

```c
// example of a successful search
pos = search(arr1, arr1 + 10, 809);
assert(pos != NULL);
assert(*pos == 809);
index = // TODO: compute the index of the matching element
assert(7 == index);
```

Fix the code at the point of the `TODO` comment so that it computes the
index of the array element that `pos` points to, where `pos` is the result
of a successful search.  Hint: this will involve a *pointer difference*
computation.

Once you've completed the `main` function, you should be able to run the
program.  If the tests pass, you will see the output:

```
All tests pass!
```

To finish this part of the exercise, add additional test cases to test the
`search` function.  You should add at least three test cases for successful
searches and three test cases for unsuccessful searches.  Make sure that
all of your tests pass.

### Part 4

For the next part of this exercise, you'll be finishing the implementation
of a sudoku checker program. The purpose of the program is to read an
input puzzle file, where 0s represent empty cells. It should then check
every row, column and cube to see if the puzzle is completely solved
already, or not. You will only need to modify the `sudokuHelper.c` file,
but should take time first to read through the code in the other files
and ask if you have any questions.

There are several helper functions you need to complete, as indicated
by `TODO` comments in the file. In both `makeCol` and `makeCube` you
need to declare the unit array that will be populated and returned in
each function. (Their declarations will be identical.) You should also
carefully read through the provided code in each method to ask if you
don't understand how they work.

Next you'll need to call these functions from two other helpers, again
where indicated by `TODO` comments in functions `checkRows`, `checkCols`
and `checkCubes`. Once this is done correctly, you should be able to
compile everything with the Makefile and run the main program with each
puzzle file as input. The first two are not correct/complete solutions,
but `puzzle3.txt` is a completely solved puzzle.

### Part 5

Lastly, using the tools you learned in Ex 11 during the last class
session, modify the `Makefile`, adding the `-g` option to your compilation
command(s) so that you can run `gdb` and `valgrind` on this code. Find
a fix the memory leaks in `sudokuHelpers.c` for this final task.

<div class='admonition tip'>
<div class='title'>Reminder</div>
<div class='content'>
<p>Remember to add and commit to your local repo copy as your work. Push
to your remote repo when finished. Also scp and submit to Gradescope
to check your solution. Use <code>exit</code> to logout from your ugrad
account when finished. If you continue to work on the program after class,
make sure to keep your repo updated as well!</p>
</div>
</div>
