---
id: ex14
layout: default
title: Exercise 14
---

<div class='admonition info'>
<div class='title'>Info</div>
<div class='content'>
<p>This is an in-class exercise. An exercise page like this one will
contain a brief description but is intended to be supplemented by
discussion during our meeting time. Complete the exercise to the best of
your ability in the time given. Feel free to talk with other students as
you work, and do not be afraid to ask questions if you get stuck. Aim to
complete as much as possible during our meeting, and submit on
Gradescope to check your solution. You are encouraged to work at home to
complete what you do not get through today.</p>
</div>
</div>

<div class='admonition tip'>
<div class='title'>Learning Objectives</div>
<div class='content'>
<p>Reinforces concepts learned in today meeting and earlier:</p>
<ul>
<li>arrays &amp; strings</li>
<li>function writing</li>
<li>bit operations (AND, OR, XOR, SHIFT)</li>
</ul>
</div>
</div>


### Part 1
Pull the starter code for this exercise from the public repo by taking the following steps:

1.	Log into an undergraduate cluster computer. Update the course public repo with a `git pull` command.

2.	Confirm that you can see the template files for today’s exercise by typing 
`ls exercises/ex14` -- you should see a file named `encrypt.c` inside.

3.  Navigate to your personal repo for the course and make a directory for today's exercise. Copy `encrypt.c` source file from the public class repository (in the `*/exercises/ex14/*` directory) into your personal repo's directory for this exercise.

  
### Part 2
The file `encrypt.c` contains some comments on each step you need to complete. Here is a description of what you need to complete:

Sam and Chloe are friends. They want to encrypt their conversation messages so that they can keep their communications confidential. Your job is to help them implement the encryption mechanism they have in mind: 

*	Every message is represented in binary; that is each and every message only includes 0s and 1s and is no longer than 32 bits long. Then it is written down `n` times, shifted to the left by `1, 2, ..., n‐1` bits for each copy. Finally, the columns are XORed together to produce the final encrypted message.


**Example**: Let us say the plain message is 1001011 and n = 4. 


	      1 0 0 1 0 1 1    shift 0 (plain message)
	    1 0 0 1 0 1 1 0    shift 1
	  1 0 0 1 0 1 1 0 0    shift 2
	1 0 0 1 0 1 1 0 0 0    shift 3 
	------------------------------
	1 1 1 0 1 0 1 0 0 1 ← final encoded message (XORed) 


Write a C program to perform this encryption. If the entered message contains anything other than 0s/1s and/or n<=0, your program should print a sensible message and exit with code 1.

1.	Open `encrypt.c` for editing using `emacs` or `vim`.

2.	Read the source code and the comments.  Your instructions are in the comments.

3.	Modify the source files and test by:
	* Compiling with `gcc -Wall -Wextra -std=c99 -pedantic encrypt.c -o encrypt` 
or using your alias: `gccc encrypt.c -o encrypt`.
	* Execute **./encrypt** and test your code.
