---
id: ex15
layout: default
title: Exercise 15
---

<div class='admonition info'>
<div class='title'>Info</div>
<div class='content'>
<p>This is an in-class exercise. An exercise page like this one will
contain a brief description but is intended to be supplemented by
discussion during our meeting time. Complete the exercise to the best of
your ability in the time given. Feel free to talk with other students as
you work, and do not be afraid to ask questions if you get stuck. Aim to
complete as much as possible during our meeting, and submit on
Gradescope to check your solution. You are encouraged to work at home to
complete what you do not get through today, and ask questions over
Piazza or in office hours.</p>
</div>
</div>

<div class='admonition tip'>
<div class='title'>Learning Objectives</div>
<div class='content'>
<p>Reinforces concepts learned in today's meeting:</p>
<ul>
<li>integer representation - endianness</li>
<li>integer representation - two’s complement</li>
<li>pseudo-random value distribution</li>
</ul>
</div>
</div>

## Part 1
Pull the starter code for this exercise from the public repo by taking the following steps:

1.	Log into an undergraduate cluster computer. Update your copy of the course public repo with a `git pull` command.

2.	Confirm that you can see the template files for today’s exercise by typing `ls exercises/ex15` — you should see the files `endian.c`, `interp.c` and `random.c`.

3.	Navigate to your personal repo for the course and make a directory for today's exercise. Copy all of the C source files (`*.c`) from the public class repository (in the `/exercises/ex15/` directory) to your personal repo's directory for this exercise.

<div class='admonition info'>
<div class='title'>Note</div>
<div class='content'>
<p>
Parts 2–4 comprise the learning activities in this exercise.
Note that Part 3 is optional.</p>
</div>
</div>

## Part 2

Compile and run the `endian.c` program using the following commands:

```bash
gcc -g -o endian -Wall -Wextra -pedantic -std=c99 endian.c
./endian
```

In its initial form, this program will print the size in bytes of several
integer data types.  You can interpret the size of each data type as being
the number of bytes required to store one value belonging to the data type.
For example, if `sizeof(int)` is 4, that means that 4 bytes are needed to
store one instance of the `int` data type.  This makes a lot of sense if
one byte stores 8 bits, and `int` is a 32-bit type.

Now that we know that instances of the various integer data types require
multiple bytes of memory to represent, an important question to ask is:
"how are the bytes of an integer value stored in memory"?  Two typical
approaches are called *little endian* and *big endian*.  On a *big endian*
computer, the most significant byte of a multi-byte data value is stored
in memory before the less-significant bytes.  In contrast, on a *little endian*
computer, the least significant byte of a multi-byte data value is stored
in memory before the more-significant bytes.

Uncomment the code labeled as "uncomment this part".  The variable called
`val` contains the value 950238851, which in hexadecimal is `38A37E83`.
That means that the bytes making up this value, from most significant to
least signnificant, are

```
38 A3 7E 83 
```

Recompile the program, then run it in `gdb` using the command

```bash
gdb endian
```

Set a breakpoint at the beginning of the `main` function using the command
`break main`.  Run the program in `gdb` using the `run` command.  Use the `next`
command until `gdb` is at the final `printf` command of the program.  The pointer
`p` points to the memory location which stores the value of the `val` variable.
Run the following commands in `gdb`:

```
print/x ((unsigned char *)p)[0]
print/x ((unsigned char *)p)[1]
print/x ((unsigned char *)p)[2]
print/x ((unsigned char *)p)[3]
```

These `gdb` commands will do the following:

* type cast the pointer to `p` to the type "pointer to `unsigned char`"
* access the 4 byte values in memory starting at the address that `p` points to
* prints each byte value in hexadecimal ("`print/x`" means "print in hexadecimal")

These `gdb` commands are a good illustration of how `gdb` can inspect arbitrary
memory locations as your program runs, and let you know exactly what is stored
at those locations.  `gdb` is extremely cool!

Based on your investigation, is the computer you are running the `endian` program
on big endian or little endian?

  
## Part 3

<div class='admonition info'>
<div class='title'>Note</div>
<div class='content'>
<p>This part of the exercise is optional. We suggest that you work on
Part 4 first, and come back to this part if you have time.</p>
</div>
</div>

In the source file `interp.c`, implement the `int_magnitude` function.
It receives an `unsigned int` value as an argument, which it should interpret as being
a 32-bit two's complement signed integer value.  It should return an
`unsigned int` value representing the *magnitude* of the argument value. In other words, it returns the absolute value of the integer if it were signed. 
A trivial implementation of the `magnitude` function would look like this:

```c
unsigned int magnitude(unsigned int val) {
  int signed_val = (int) val;
  if (signed_val < 0) {
    val = -signed_val;
  }
  return val;
}
```

Using your knowledge of two's complement representation and bitwise operators,
implement the `magnitude` function without using any signed values.
In other words, don't use any values belonging to the `int` data type,
or any other signed data type.

Here is a suggested approach using bit operations:

* If the highest bit of `val` is not set to 1, then just return the value as-is
* If the highest bit of `val` is set to 1, then its magnitude can be found by
  subtracting the value of the bits other than the highest bit from the
  `unsigned int` value numerically equal to `INT_MAX` plus 1
* Hexadecimal value `0x80000000u` represents an unsigned integer with only the left-most (highest) bit set to one, so `0x7FFFFFFFu` represents an unsigned integer with all except the left-most bit set to one.

Compile the program using the command

```bash
gcc -g -o interp -Wall -Wextra -pedantic -std=c99 interp.c
```

Run the program using the command  `./interp`.
You will know if your implementation is correct if you can run the program,
and all of the `assert` statements in the `main` function succeed.


## Part 4

**1.** Random numbers are only as good as the seed that is used to
initialize the pseudo-random generator. In the source file `random.c`,
add a statement to call the `set_seed` function at TODO (1) so that the
`seed` value input by the user is used for the initialization.  Also,
implement the `set_seed` function (TODO (2)) so that it calls `srand`
with the seed value as the argument.

**2.** One important property of the `rand` function is that it generates
a *uniform* distribution of pseudo-random integer values.

In the source file `random.c`, add a definition for the
`gen_uniform` function as indicated by the `TODO (3)` comment.
The `gen_uniform` function should return a pseudo-random integer in
the range 0 to `max_num-1`, inclusive, uniformly distributed.

Next, as indicated by the `TODO (4)` comment in the `main` function,
add code to generate 500 uniformly-generated pseudo-random integers
and increment the elements of the `hist` array accordingly.  (Each
generated pseudo-random integer should be used to increment the `hist`
array element with the same index as the generated pseudo-random integer.)

Compile the program:

```bash
gcc -g -o random -Wall -Wextra -pedantic -std=c99 random.c
```

Run the program using the command `./random` with input values 10, 30.  The output should look something like the following:

```
Uniform distribution:
 0: ****************
 1: ****************
 2: ******************
 3: *****************
 4: ************
 5: ***************
 6: *****************
 7: ************
 8: ***********************
 9: **********************
10: ****************
11: *************
12: ******************
13: *******************
14: *****************************
15: *************
16: ********************
17: *****************
18: ********************
19: **************
20: *******************
21: **************
22: ***************
23: ***********
24: ***********
25: **************
26: *****************
27: ***************
28: ***********
29: **************************
```

The output of `print_hist` should show that each element of the `hist` array
values that are similar to each other.  This is what we expect from a normal
distribution.

**3.** A *normal* distribution of pseudo-random integers can be generated by
summing multiple uniformly-distributed pseudo-random integer values.

In `random.c` add a definition for the `normal_rand` function, as
indicated by the `TODO (5)` comment.  This function should generate values
according to a normal distribution (refer to the comment for details).
The `normal_rand` function should return a pseudo-random integer in the
range 0 to `max_num-1`, inclusive, normally distributed.

Then, as indicated by the `TODO (5)` comment in the `main` function,
add code to generate 500 normally-generated pseudo-random integers and
increment the elements of the `hist` array accordingly.  (Each generated
pseudo-random integer should be used to increment the `hist` array
element with the same index as the generated pseudo-random integer.)

Compile and run the program.  The output should look something like
the following:

```
Normal distribution:
 0: 
 1: *
 2: 
 3: *
 4: *
 5: 
 6: *
 7: *********
 8: ********************
 9: **********************
10: ********************
11: ********************************
12: *************************************
13: *********************************
14: *********************************************
15: ***********************************************
16: ***********************************************
17: ************************************************
18: ****************************************
19: ******************************
20: ***************
21: ****************
22: *************
23: ***********
24: *****
25: *
26: ***
27: **
28: 
29: 
```

Your program's output doesn't need to look exactly like the output shown above,
but it should show a "bell curve" centered at approximately the middle of the
array of counts.

You may need to experiment a bit to find a good way to generate a more-or-less
normal distribution.

<div class='admonition tip'>
<div class='title'>Reminder</div>
<div class='content'>
<p>Remember to add and commit to your local repo copy as your work. Push
to your remote repo when finished. Also scp and submit to Gradescope to
check your solution. Use <code>exit</code> to logout from your ugrad
account when finished. If you continue to work on the program after
class, make sure to keep your repo updated as well!</p>
</div>
</div>
