---
id: ex28
layout: default
title: Exercise 28
---

<div class='admonition info'>
<div class='title'>Info</div>
<div class='content'>
<p>This is an in-class exercise. An exercise page like this one will
contain a brief description but is intended to be supplemented by
discussion during our meeting time. Complete the exercise to the best of
your ability in the time given. Feel free to talk with other students as
you work, and do not be afraid to ask questions if you get stuck. Aim to
complete as much as possible during our meeting. You are encouraged to
work at home to complete what you do not get through today, and ask
questions over Piazza or in office hours.</p>
</div>
</div>

<div class='admonition tip'>
<div class='title'>Learning Objectives</div>
<div class='content'>
<p>Reinforces concepts learned in today meeting:</p>
<ul>
<li>C++ classes, fields &amp; member functions</li>
<li>Access modifiers (public &amp; private)</li>
<li>Dynamic memory allocation in C++</li>
<li>Alternate constructors</li>
<li>Destructors</li>
</ul>
</div>
</div>

Today’s exercise is a variation of what we did in the last exercise. Rather than having a vector inside the `GradeList` class, we will have a dynamically allocated array that gets resized, as necessary. You will also create an alternate constructor (with default parameters) and (later) a destructor.


### Part 1
Pull the starter code for this exercise from the public repo by taking the following steps:

1.	Log into ugrad, then navigate to the public repo and type `git pull` to synchronize your local repo and working copy with the remote repo.

2.	Copy the starter code for today from the public repo `exercises/ex28` into your personal repo where desired. Then navigate to your personal repo folder for this exercise. You should see files named `Makefile`, `grade_list.[h/cpp]`, and `main[1/2].cpp` inside.

### Part 2
Read the instructional comments in `grade_list.h` and `grade_list.cpp`. Read `main1.cpp`.  It shows an example of how to use the given code for the `GradeList` class. 
Try to compile `main1.cpp`.  It doesn’t work because several things are missing from the `GradeList` class, including definitions of the constructor, the `add` functions, and the `clear` function. Follow the instructions in the comments in `grade_list.h` and `grade_list.cpp` to write these missing functions for which we have provided headers within the `grade_list.h` file.  You should not change anything in the `grade_list.h` file. Try to not reinvent the wheel when writing the add functions.

You can compile and run the code using commands `make main1` and `./main1`.

<div class='admonition tip'>
<div class='title'>Tip</div>
<div class='content'>
<p>The capacity of the <code>GradeList</code> object should never be
less than one. You should check for this when implementing the
constructor.</p>
</div>
</div>

<div class='admonition tip'>
<div class='title'>Tip</div>
<div class='content'>
<p>When calling the constructor, the input parameter specifies the
target <code>capacity</code> not the number of elements stored in the
<code>GradeList</code> object.</p>
</div>
</div>

<div class='admonition tip'>
<div class='title'>Tip</div>
<div class='content'>
<p>When implementing the <code>clear</code> member function you should
end up with a <code>GradeList</code> object with zero elements but with
a capacity of one.</p>
</div>
</div>


### Part 3
Run `valgrind` on `main1.cpp`. Add a destructor to the `GradeList` class in order to prevent the memory leak. This should free the memory for the array.  If that does not take care of everything, consider whether you wrote the clear function properly and if the add function is leaking memory when you resize.

### Part 4
Try to compile `main2.cpp`.  It doesn’t work because several things are missing from the `GradeList` class, including methods `begin()` and `end()` that mimic the behaviour of an iterator using actual pointers, as well as a default constructor. Add the missing pieces to the `GradeList` class (in `.h` and/or `.cpp` files).  When you modify the `GradeList` class do not change the access modifier (e.g. `private`) of any of the members. Check to make sure this program does not have any memory leaks either, using `valgrind` again.

You can compile and run the code using commands `make main2` and `./main2`.

<div class='admonition tip'>
<div class='title'>Reminder</div>
<div class='content'>
<p>Remember to add and commit to your local repo copy as your work. Push
to your remote repo when finished. [No need to submit to Gradescope to
check your solution.] Use <code>exit</code> to logout from your ugrad
account when finished. If you continue to work on the program after
class, make sure to keep your repo updated as well!</p>
</div>
</div>
