---
id: ex29
layout: default
title: Exercise 29
---

<div class='admonition info'>
<div class='title'>Info</div>
<div class='content'>
<p>This is an in-class exercise. An exercise page like this one will
contain a brief description but is intended to be supplemented by
discussion during our meeting time. Complete the exercise to the best of
your ability in the time given. Feel free to talk with other students as
you work, and do not be afraid to ask questions if you get stuck. Aim to
complete as much as possible during our meeting. You are encouraged to
work at home to complete what you do not get through today, and ask
questions over Piazza or in office hours.</p>
</div>
</div>

<div class='admonition tip'>
<div class='title'>Learning Objectives</div>
<div class='content'>
<p>Reinforces concepts learned in today's meeting:</p>
<ul>
<li>C++ classes, fields &amp; member functions</li>
<li>Operator overloading</li>
<li>The <code>friend</code> keyword</li>
</ul>
</div>
</div>

### Part 1
Pull the starter code for this exercise from the public repo by taking the following steps:

1.	Log into ugrad, navigate into our public repo, then type `git pull` to synchronize your local repo and working copy with the remote repo.

2.	Copy the files from the public class repository `/exercises/ex29/` directory to your personal repo. Navigate to your personal repo copy -- you should see files named `Makefile`, `complex.[h/cpp]`, and `main.cpp` inside.

### Part 2
The main purpose of this exercise is to complete the definition of a class to store and operate on complex numbers. Read the instructional comments in `complex.h` and `complex.cpp` to start, then review `main.cpp`.  It shows an example of how to use the given code for the `Complex` class. You can compile and run the code using commands `make main` and `./main`.

The first task is to overload and implement the `operator<<` function for printing complex objects. After your implementation, you can uncomment the related parts in `main.c`, compile and test your implementation. (Note: remember to use the `friend` keyword.)

### Part 3
Follow the instructions in the comments in `complex.h` and `complex.cpp` to write some missing functions for which we have provided headers within the `complex.h` file.  You should not change anything in the `complex.h` file. Try to not reinvent the wheel when writing the add functions. After your implementation, you can uncomment the related parts in `main.c`, compile and test your implementation.

### Part 4
When we multiply a `float` with the `Complex` class, it will not work as we have not overloaded the `operator*` for the `float`. It can be done by adding a non-member function to allow a `float` to be multiplied by a `Complex` value. Finish the implementation in `complex.cpp` prototyped in `complex.h`. After your implementation, you can uncomment the related parts in `main.c`, compile and test your implementation.

<div class='admonition tip'>
<div class='title'>Reminder</div>
<div class='content'>
<p>Remember to add and commit to your local repo copy as your work. Push
to your remote repo when finished. [No need to submit to Gradescope to
check your solution.] Use <code>exit</code> to logout from your ugrad
account when finished. If you continue to work on the program after
class, make sure to keep your repo updated as well!</p>
</div>
</div>
