---
id: ex30
layout: default
title: Exercise 30
---

<div class='admonition info'>
<div class='title'>Info</div>
<div class='content'>
<p>This is an in-class exercise. An exercise page like this one will
contain a brief description but is intended to be supplemented by
discussion during our meeting time. Complete the exercise to the best of
your ability in the time given. Feel free to talk with other students as
you work, and do not be afraid to ask questions if you get stuck. Aim to
complete as much as possible during our meeting. You are encouraged to
work at home to complete what you do not get through today, and ask
questions over Piazza or in office hours.</p>
</div>
</div>


<div class='admonition tip'>
<div class='title'>Learning Objectives</div>
<div class='content'>
<p>Reinforces concepts learned in today meeting:</p>
<ul>
<li>C++ classes, fields &amp; member functions</li>
<li>Linked lists in C++</li>
<li>Operator overloading, friend functions, rule of three</li>
</ul>
</div>
</div>

### Part 1
Pull the starter code for this exercise from the public repo by taking the following steps:

1.	Log into ugrad, navigate into our public repo, then type `git pull` to synchronize your local repo and working copy with the remote repo.

2.	Copy the files from the public class repository `/exercises/ex30/` directory to your personal repo. Navigate to your personal repo copy -- you should see files named `Makefile`, `README`, `int_node.h`, `int_set.[h/cpp]`, and `main1.cpp` inside.


### Part 2
Read `main1.cpp`.  It shows an example of how to use the given code for the `int_set` class. You can compile and run the code using commands `make main1` and `./main1`. Some of the statements in `main1.cpp` will not compile yet because of missing functions in `int_set.cpp`. You can comment them out to check that the supplied code is working correctly. 

Follow the instructional comments in `README` and `int_set.cpp` to write some missing functions for which we have provided headers.  You should not change anything in the `int_set.h` file. Do not reinvent the wheel when implementing these functions! That is, consider how code reuse can make your job easier.


### Part 3
Run `valgrind` on `main1.cpp` by calling `valgrind --leak-check=full ./main1`. Fix any memory leaks that it finds. Finally, add a new line in `main1.cpp` which assigns an existing non-empty set to itself, e.g. `s = s;`  Investigate what occurs using `valgrind`! See if you are able to eliminate any problems that occur.
