---
id: ex37
layout: default
title: Exercise 36
---

<div class='admonition info'>
<div class='title'>Info</div>
<div class='content'>
<p>This is an in-class exercise. An exercise page like this one will contain a brief description but is intended to be supplemented by discussion during our meeting time. Complete the exercise to the best of your ability in the time given. Feel free to talk with other students as you work, and do not be afraid to ask questions if you get stuck. Aim to complete as much as possible during our meeting. You are encouraged to work at home to complete what you do not get through today, and ask questions over Piazza or in office hours.</p>
</div>
</div>

<div class='admonition tip'>
<div class='title'>Learning Objectives</div>
<div class='content'>
<p>Gain practice writing an <code>iterator</code> and <code>const_iterator</code> for a container class.</p>
</div>
</div>

### Part 1
Pull the starter code for this exercise from the public repo by taking the following steps:

1.	Log into ugrad, then navigate to the public repo and type `git pull` to synchronize your local working copy with the remote repo.

2.	Copy the above files from the public repository (in the `/exercises/ex37/` directory) into your personal repo where desired. Then navigate to your personal repo folder for this exercise. Confirm that you can see the template files for today’s exercise -- files named `Makefile`, `MyNode.h`, `MyList.h`, `MyList.inc`, and `main1.cpp`, `main2.cpp`, `main3.cpp`, and `main4.cpp` inside.


### Part 2
Open `MyList.h`, `MyList.inc` and `MyNode.h` to see how they are implemented. Compile and run the code in `main1.cpp` using the commands `make main1` and `./main1`. Check the output of the program and confirm that it makes sense, given the source code. Do you understand why it is possible for `main()` to modify the list via the pointer returned by `mli.get_head()`?

### Part 3
Read through `main2.cpp`.  You can try to compile the code using the command `make main2` however you will receive a bunch of errors because the `MyList<T>::iterator` nested class is not fully defined in `MyList.h` (see TODO Part 3a).  Following the comments in `MyList.h`, fill in the missing portions of `MyList<T>::iterator` until `main2.cpp` compiles and prints the expected output.

Once you have that working, see TODO Part 3b in `main2.cpp`.  When you uncomment the line just below, the code should still compile, and the output should show that the list elements were changed.

### Part 4
Read through `main3.cpp`.  You can try to compile the code using the command `make main3` however you will receive a bunch of errors because the `MyList<T>::const_iterator` nested class is not defined (see TODO Part 4a in `MyList.h`).  Fill in the missing portions of `MyList<T>::const_iterator` until `main3.cpp` compiles and prints the expected output.

Once you have that working, see TODO Part 4b in `main3.cpp`.  When you uncomment the line just below, the code should <u>fail</u> to compile, since the `const_iterator` should not allow you to modify elements of the list.


### Part 5
Read through `main4.cpp`.  You can try to compile the code using the command `make main4`, however you will receive a bunch of errors because the `MyList<T>` constructor that takes two iterators (see TODO Part 5 in `MyList.h`) is missing.  Fill in the missing portions of `template<typename Itr> MyList<T>::MyList<T>(Itr i_begin, Itr i_end)` until `main4.cpp` compiles and prints the expected output. Note that the `typename Itr` is just another placeholder like our usual `typename T`, but here `Itr` will stand for some iterator type.

<div class='admonition tip'>
<div class='title'>Reminder</div>
<div class='content'>
<p>Remember to add and commit to your local repo copy as your work. Push to your remote repo when finished and submit to Gradescope to check your solution. Use <code>exit</code> to logout from your ugrad account when finished. If you continue to work on the program after class, make sure to keep your repo updated as well!</p>
</div>
</div>
